Werewolves of Wakkerdam

The game

The game preparation:

The players decide who will be the leader of the game. The game leader himself does not participate, but gives instructions to the players. Choose someone who is extroverted and able to convey the excitement to the players. Someone with acting talent? Fantasy?
Humour?
If it is a children's party, it is recommended that the game be led by an adult.
A good game leader is a guarantee for a top evening!
The game master composes the combination of characters and the numbers (if the thief is playing, add 2 extra common citizens), shuffles the cards and each player deals a character card face down. The players secretly look at their card and place it face down in front of them.
The game master now puts the village to sleep, because the night has come. He says, "It's night. Everyone's asleep. All the players are closing their eyes now."
Of course he makes a show of it, complete with creepy references to full moons and suspicious shadows that creep through Wakkerdam. All players hang their heads and close their eyes.
Now the game master calls out the different characters that appear in the game.


Preparatory phase (from the first night)
(Not applicable to the beginners variant: proceed to the normal phase of the first night)

A. The game master calls the thief:
He says: "The thief wakes up".
The player with the thief's character card opens his eyes and silently looks at the two face down cards, which are in the middle of the table. Then he changes character by exchanging his character card with one of the character cards lying on the table.
The game master says: "The thief falls asleep again". The thief closes his eyes again.

B. The game master calls Cupid.
He says "Cupid wake up".
Cupid opens his eyes and points to two players who fall in love with each other. The game leader walks up to them and gently touches their shoulders.
Then he says: "Cupid falls asleep". Cupid closes his eyes again.

C. The game leader calls the lovers.
He says: "The lovers wake up, they look at each other and they fall asleep again."

They don't show each other their character cards because lovers are never supposed to know the whole truth about each other.
Now the game leader continues with the normal phase. Normal phase (from the first night)

This can vary depending on the number of characters involved and their status in the game. However, they are always called in the following order:

1. The game master calls the seer.
He says, "The seer wakes up and points out a player whose identity she wants to discover."
The game master shows the seer that player's character card.

1b. The game master calls the soldier.
The soldier may ask the seer for advice. He points out someone, if this is someone whose character the seer knows, the seer will tell him. If the seer does not know, then both players fall asleep again.

He says, "The seer and the soldier fall asleep." The seer and the soldier close their eyes.

2. The game leader calls the guardian angel.
The guardian angel points out someone. This character, werewolf or not, is protected for the night and the day ahead. Should the protected be one of the lovers, his beloved is also protected.

The guardian angel is not allowed to protect itself.

3. The game leader calls the village idiot.
The village idiot may look at three other players' cards once in the game. He just doesn't know which character belongs to which person. The village idiot decides when he looks at the cards.

4. The game master calls the ghost
The ghost may change character once during the game. He chooses a card from the collected cards of the people who died. He is this character for the rest of the game.

5. The game leader calls the werewolves.
He says: "The werewolves wake up, look at each other and choose a new victim".
The werewolves (and no one else) raise their heads, open their eyes, look at each other and choose a victim.
(Now the innocent girl may secretly peek at the werewolves by opening her eyes a fraction. However, she may also refrain from this. If she is caught, the werewolves may change their mind, making the innocent girl the next victim instead of the previously designated citizen.)
The game master says, "The werewolves go back to sleep, to dream of their next tasty morsel."
5b. The Baker
Bakers always get up early, they are up much earlier than ordinary citizens. The moment the game leader tells the werewolves that they are going to sleep again, the baker may open his eyes. So he could catch a late wolf. He must do this carefully, if the wolves notice him, they can of course finish him off the next turn.

6. The game leader calls the witch.
(Not in the beginners game).
He says, "The witch is waking up. I'm going to point out the victim. Is the witch going to use her elixir of life or her poison?"
The game master points out to the witch who the next victim of the werewolves is. The witch does not have to use her power in any given turn. If the witch decides to use her potion, she indicates this to the game master by a thumbs up for elixir of life or a thumbs down for poison.
The game leader announces the result the next morning.

7. The game leader wakes up the citizens.
He says, "It's morning. The village wakes up and everyone opens their eyes. Everyone except..."
Now the game master names the player or players who fell victim to the werewolves and the witch during the night.
- Those players show their character cards, and they are now out of the game. They are not allowed to communicate with the other players in any way.
- If one of the victims is the hunter, he may retaliate and kill a player of his choice directly.
- If one of the victims is one of the lovers, the other lover dies directly from a broken heart.
- If one of the victims is the mayor, he immediately appoints his successor.
- If one of the victims is the sun, all werewolves die.

 
8. The citizens express and discuss their suspicions.
The game leader takes the initiative and leads the conversation. A suspicious noise in the night, strange behavior of one of the players, or maybe one of the citizens always votes the same way...
These are all indications that can lead to a person being suspected of being a werewolf.
During this phase it is important to understand that the players sometimes have different goals:
- All citizens try to expose werewolves and get the others to vote against him;
- The werewolves try to pretend to be civilians;
- The gravedigger must try to blacken the werewolves out of sight of the werewolves.
- The seer, the soldier, the gravedigger, the innocent girl and the baker must
trying to help the other citizens, without losing their own 'life';
- The lovers must protect each other.
- The eyewitness must convince the others that he is the eyewitness.
 

Anyone can pretend to be someone else. This fact is the heart of the game. Use your talent, bluff or tell the truth, but above all, keep your credibility!
And: never show your character card to anyone!

You can assume that you will be exposed at some point. Either way, the pieces of the puzzle always fit together in the end. Well...almost always!

9. The village votes.
The players must eliminate a player they think is a werewolf.
When the game leader has counted to three, each player points a finger at a player they want to eliminate. The player with the most votes is out of the game. Remember, the mayor's vote counts double. If the vote is a draw, the mayor designates the victim. If there is no mayor, a new vote is taken.
Everyone agrees. If there is no decision yet, no one will be eliminated. The eliminated player shows his character card and is out of the game. He may not communicate with anyone until the game is over.

10. The village is asleep.
The game master says: "It is night, the survivors go to sleep".
The players close their eyes again. Players who are out of the game should keep quiet, especially if they find out who the werewolves are. Play resumes from the beginning of the normal phase.


Winning
The citizens win as soon as they take out the last werewolf. The werewolves win as soon as they devour the last citizen.
The lovers win, if they are the last standing together (even if they are a civilian and a werewolf).

Advice to the game master
The success of the game largely depends on the presentation of the game leader. It is therefore largely thanks to him, if the players have had a nice evening. This success can be achieved by presenting the game with energy. Build suspense, ramp up the suspense, feed the fear as the names of the victims are read aloud. Keep the discussions about who the werewolves might be lively. Zip through the players, don't make any mistakes that will betray the players. The sentences that the game leader has to pronounce are only essentials. It is of course the intention that the game master uses his imagination and acting talent to increase the atmosphere around this game, and to make it an exciting story.
Welcome to the world of role playing!
You can play several games per night. It is then recommended to vary the composition of the characters.






Important:
-Try to keep up with the times during the game. It's all too easy to give the game away because of a small mistake. How about, "The witch wakes up. He...uh, she goes...etc."
-If you address certain characters (e.g. werewolves) during the night, try not to look at them for a long time. This can be an important clue to other players, even with their eyes closed. Walk around the table a lot!
-If werewolves can't agree, it's bad luck that night
no prey…
-If the innocent girl plays along, other players must be told to keep their heads up and not cover their eyes with their hands.
-If the seer is allowed to see a character card, rummage through all the cards on the table, so that no one can guess who has pointed out the seer.
-Walk around the entire table while pointing out the lovers.

Tips for the players
- The werewolves: An effective way to debunk an accusation is to vote against your partner. This will certainly not escape the attention of citizens...
- The seer: Watch out! If you discover the identity of a werewolf, it may be worth the risk of revealing your identity and accusing the player... But don't do it too quickly!
- The Innocent Girl: A very powerful character, but nerve-racking to play! Don't be afraid to spy on the werewolves. It can be scary, but it's crucial to get useful information quickly before you get caught and eliminated.
- The Hunter: If you're accused of being a werewolf, saying you're the hunter can be a deterrent!
- Cupid: If you designate yourself as one of the lovers, choose a partner who does not easily talk past his (or her) mouth.
- The Mayor: Don't be afraid to put yourself forward for this office: Keep lobbying. If you're a werewolf, it's better not to run for mayor in a flashy way.
- The Witch: This character could be the strongest in the whole game, but don't waste your potions.
 
